---
id: 24742011
title: 'Africa&#8217;s first on-demand mobile TV offering launches today'
date: 2010-08-02T08:04:00+00:00
author: Alistair Fairweather
excerpt: "If you'd told me a week ago that we'd have fully functional on-demand TV for mobile phones this year, I would have been highly skeptical. If you'd told me the service would require no downloads or apps, that it would work on 90% of 3G handsets and..."
layout: post
guid: http://alistairfairweather.com/africas-first-on-demand-mobile-tv-offering-la
permalink: /africas-first-on-demand-mobile-tv-offering-la/
posterous_post:
  - "24742011"
categories:
  - General ponderings
---
<p>If you'd told me a week ago that we'd have fully functional on-demand TV for mobile phones this year, I would have been highly skeptical. If you'd told me the service would require no downloads or apps, that it would work on 90% of 3G handsets and that it would cost a flat rate of R75 per month (or R20 per week), bandwidth included, I would have called you a liar or at the very least a fantasist.<p /> But that, in a nutshell, is the new offering from <a href="http://www.ondemand.co.uk/" target="_blank">On Demand Group</a> - a London based video-on-demand specialist - who have partnered with Vodacom to offer <em>unlimited</em> on-demand video content at a flat rate per month.<p /> I still would have been highly skeptical of the launch unless I had seen it demonstrated, live, while sitting in a coffee shop with the dudes from On Demand (and their marketing agency <a href="http://cowafrica.co.za/" target="_blank">Cow Africa</a>). Here's the skinny on how it works:<br /> - Customers subscribe via a WAP portal (linked to from Vodafone Live)<br />- Billing is done via Vodacom - both contract and pre-paid customers can participate<br />- Shows are browsed and searched via the WAP portal<br />- When you click on a show it launches in the handset's default video player (apparently this works for all major players)<br /> - The show is streamed to your handset in real time<br />- You can pause, fast-forward and rewind<p />These sorts of services rise or fall depending on their library. So far they have a fairly impressive line-up with shows like Grey's Anatomy, Desperate Housewives, South Park and Entourage. They also have hundreds of music videos - something I think will drive their uptake hugely in the middle to lower income brackets. I do think they need to broaden their offering quite rapidly though. Shows like The Sopranos are undoubtedly fantastic - but they need to get newer, edgier shows to ensure they can maintain momentum. <p /> At the moment the service is limited to Vodacom, but the On Demand guys are keen to stress that the deal is non-exclusive - so it may be rolled out to the other providers in due course.<p />As far as the technical end of the system goes, they're using both MPEG4 and H264 and encoding for both 16:9 and 4:3 aspect ratios. I'm hoping to chat to their engineers a bit more about some of the specifics (like how the heavy lifting, demand forecasting and load balancing all works) - but that's for another post.<p /> I've attached all the official bumph below (including some screenshots). I don't know for certain whether this will work - but it's certainly going to give DSTV's linear channel model a run for its money.</p><p>[gallery]</p>